Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you, friends, on this 16th Sunday of Ordinary Time. Our gospel is the ever-popular Martha Mary gospel. I say ever-popular with a tongue-in-cheek a bit because...
Because in my years of preaching, it's one that helps.
Tends to bother people a lot.
I've heard more and more criticisms. I don't know what's going on there, Father. Explain that to me. So we'll get to Martha and Mary, but...
I want to focus first on reading number one, which is really extraordinary from the book of Genesis. It's part of the cycle of stories about Abraham. And it's
It's really weird. It's a weird story, and it's intrigued the tradition, both theological and artistic. In fact, one of the great icons of the Trinity is based upon the
upon this scene.
And here's how it opens.
The Lord,
appeared to Abraham by this hair of the mammary. So Abraham is there, it's a hot day, he's by this tree in his intent. And it said, clearly, the Lord appeared to him. So,
Oh, God is making an appearance. Now, often in the Old Testament, God's presence is mediated by the angelic. But now listen. Listen.
So he's sitting in the inner stew's tent, the day's growing hot. Looking up.
100% Abraham saw three men standing nearby.
When he saw them, he ran.
From the entrance of the tent to greet them.
And bowing to the ground, he said, Sir,
If I may ask you this favor.
let me you know wait on you.
All right.
There's a lot going on here in this transplant story. Yeah.
So,
We've been told already the Lord's appearing.
Well, how interesting that he appears in the form of three people.
3 men or three angels. Huh. Why three?
Well, the Christian mind right away is intrigued by this.
That God is somehow a play of three in one.
Looking up,
He sees them and then he runs.
to greet them. Now this is in some ways the key to the whole story.
When God appears to you, you don't sit around.
You don't wait till tomorrow.
You don't put it off because there's something more important.
No, you run.
See, when the Lord is coming into your life, you don't mess around. You don't compromise. You run. Run.
To the lord
But then see this is why i find it so intriguing runs greets and vows so again this is an acknowledgement of the divinity of what's appearing to him bowing to the ground that's the end
That's the attitude of worship. Worship.
Okay. But this is what I find really interesting. Okay.
He says, "Sir, sir,
If I may ask you this favor,
He's addressing three people, right?
Why does he just say sir?
There's a weird play here of plurality, the three.
And the one?
Because we're told the Lord appeared, so that's the one God. Right.
But he appears
In terms of these three men,
who Abraham worshipped, so that's appropriate to God.
But then Abraham refers to them as "Sir" as one.
Huh. Do you see now why the tradition...
I saw in the scene something kind of weirdly interesting. Yeah.
about the triune quality of God.
But then.
Abraham ran, he bowed, and then boy does he get going.
He's been.
What are these servants? Let's say water be brought. You may bathe your feet. Then rest yourself under the tree. Okay.
Now you come this close to your servant. Let me bring you a little food. You may refresh yourselves. Afterwards, you may go on your way. Let me be of complete service to you. That's for you.
That's what he's saying
Now, Abraham,
He's a prominent figure. He's a patriarchal figure.
It was indeed part of ancient Middle Eastern hospitality to be kind to visitors that come upon you because in that desert culture, it was often a matter of life and death.
of life and death.
If someone just comes upon you, they might have been wandering for days and they need food and drink. So that's understandable on the surface level. Yeah.
But the really interesting thing is the deeper level.
If we are talking about a theophany here, a manifestation of God,
What we're seeing in all the moves and gestures of Abraham is the right path.
attitude,
Go! Don't delay!
Oh, man, for our culture today,
So secularized and God, well, I guess if that's your thing and...
No, no. If you're talking about God, right?
You move, you act.
And then you worship. That's the right attitude. You don't say, oh, God, you know, one interest I have among many.
Oh yeah, I like, you know, I like baseball, I like politics, I like, you know, my family, and I like God, and I like,
No no no no no
The right attitude toward God is:
Worship. Worship. And then...
Radical service.
Abraham is saying basically, look, my life is about you now. I mean, I'm not here to serve myself, make myself comfortable.
No, my life is all about...
You, you.
Speed,
Reverence, reverence, reverence.
Radical service. Does that make sense?
Fellow believers,
You know, do a little searching moral inventory of your own spiritual life. And you say, "Oh yeah, I believe in God. Oh yeah, God is so important to me."
Are all these moves on display in your life?
Do you act? You move.
When the lord has come near
You worship him
Faithfully and regularly
Oh, yeah. God's so important to me. When was the last time you went to Mass? Oh, you know, 10 years ago. Yeah.
then you're not taking God seriously.
"'Oh, God is the center of my life.'"
Well, how often do you serve God? Show me exactly how you're giving your life to God.
Oh, you know, I don't really have time for all that.
No, then you're not.
serving God.
Take Abraham here in the presence of these three men, angels, whatever you want to call them.
As emblematic
of the way we ought to be relating to God.
All right.
Now, the church gives us this reading as a kind of propodutic to reading.
The familiar Martha Mary story. And I think it does provide the right interpretive framework.
For this,
Again, controversial story.
so.
If we hear, Jesus enters a village.
We're a woman whose name was Martha. Welcome to him. She has a sister named Mary.
"'Who sat beside the Lord at his feet.'"
Listening to him speak.
Now, right away,
it's abraham.
He sees the Lord and he gets to it. He is completely destroyed.
2020 devoted, dedicated.
Well, that's the attitude.
Of Mary in the story.
That's what we're meant to see
is the Lord has come
Jesus.
What do you do when Jesus presents himself to you? Well, you don't mess around. You don't say, "Well, I'll get around to it." Well, let me take care of, you know, X, Y, and Z, and then
And then, then, then.
No, no, no.
She's
About one thing
She's about one thing.
She is focused on the Lord, right?
Then we hear Martha.
Burdened with much serving.
I came to him and said, Lord, don't you care? My sisters left me by myself to do the serving. Tell her to help me.
Now, here's the point where lots of people sympathize with Martha.
And hey, I get it. They're married. Just, you know, she's kind of horsing around there. And I got this whole party to prepare. And I got food and I've got hospitality.
And here I'm trying to do my job. And she's amazing.
Come on, Lord, tell her to help me.
Now, listen to the Lord's response.
The Lord said to her, to Martha in reply,
Martha Martha
You're anxious and worried about.
Many things.
There's need
Of only one thing
Mary's chosen the better part.
And it will not be taken from her
Okay.
Can I tell you what I think this story does not mean?
And especially with our first reading in mind.
It doesn't mean
Oh, the contemplative life is better than the active life. You know, Mary stands for prayer and stands for liturgy and all this. And Martha stands for this kind of busy, active life.
And the contemplative life is clearly superior to the active life.
Now, I know that interpretation has been given up and down the centuries. I don't think that's what it's about. And one of the signs is Abraham, in that first reading, he meant he's a
And he's fussing around with lots of hospitality, fetching water and preparing the meal. And he's like Martha, isn't he? He's very involved in hospitality.
Hospitality.
So you say, okay, well, what's at stake here? What is the issue?
Listen again to the Lord.
Martha, Martha, you are anxious and worried.
About many things.
all right.
This is life, right? We can all identify with her.
Right now, as I record these words, I'm thinking about the day ahead of me, which has a lot to do with governing this diocese that went on at Rochester. I'm thinking about a trip I've got to make. I'm tricky.
Thinking about preparations I have to do for talks. I'm thinking about this meeting I have in Washington in about 10 days. Yeah. Yeah.
I'm anxious and upset right now about a lot of different things. Yeah.
Well, that's life.
The problem is when we become monomaniacally focused
On all the.
Little things.
That are preoccupying us.
We're split, we're divided.
We're worried about this than that.
I've talked to you about the monkey mind that leaps from branch to branch. There's kind of a version of that. I'm worried and anxious about many things.
Mary has chosen.
And I've always loved the Latin of this.
The Unum,
Necessarium.
That means,
The one thing
Necessary.
What's that?
God.
and the love of God.
When God comes into your life, God makes himself present.
That's what your whole life is about.
Your whole attention should be focused on God.
God, listen now, cannot become God.
One of the many things that you're worried about
See, that's a metaphysical mistake. If I say I'm worried about this, about that, about this person, that person, about this thing, this trip, and so on, and I'm worried about God, I'm
What have I done? I've made God into some being in the world.
So one of my many preoccupations.
God, we say, with Thomas Aquinas, is the sheer act of to be itself.
It has to say, that which creatively undergirds and gives rise to all of reality. Right.
He's not one concern among many.
God.
is the Unam Nesesaria.
The one thing necessary
Now watch.
when I am completely focused on God
In this in this intense way
I've not left behind.
The many things.
Rather, I place the many things
In their proper context and framework.
Martha is the splintered soul, the splintered self. And she's flitting from flower to flower, from worry to worry. Yeah.
Anxious, upset about many things.
Mary has chosen the Unum Necessaria.
So now she's in a position.
to handle the many things. See, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not
I'm playing one off the other.
Like, that's good, that's bad.
No, as Augustine said.
Love God
And then love
Everything else for the sake of God.
now you got it.
"'Now you brought Martha and Mary together.'"
love God
Unum necessarium
God appears, you run.
You worship,
You serve
God is the one thing necessary.
And in that very move,
Now all the many things I'm concerned about.
Find their proper.
Place.
Look, we're all sinners. And so what happens to us is...
I'm so worried about this. I'm so worried about that. Now, now I'm worried about this. Oh yeah. And there's that coming. And before I know it, I'm a basket case of nerves because we're able to
As wherever I look, there's something to concern me.
How about,
I'm focused on the own unnecessary
Okay.
Only in God is my soul at rest.
There's the interior castle. There's the place of peace.
And from that,
Serenity of soul
I can now find the right attitude.
Toward all the many things that preoccupy me.
I think that's a way to read Martha and Mary together together.
100% in light of Abraham. He's fussing around with lots of activity, but all of it is grounded in faith.
His.
complete focus on God and the things of God.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire.org.